4,000th svn commit/revision
===========================

This evening Doctrine reached a milestone of four thousand commits
in svn. Doctrine has maintained steady development for almost three
years strong, and we feel this milestone is very significant for
the evolution of Doctrine. Today, we would like to announce that
the first generation of Doctrine, also know as 0.10, will be the
first real candidate for the first(second) stable 1.0 version.
After 3 point releases of the 0.10 branch we have fixed over 100
tickets, and made huge steps towards the first stable release of
Doctrine. Several months ago, we decided to make a feature freeze
as 0.9 branch, so that we could continue on going refactorings to
Doctrine while providing a stable branch for our users. Now,
several months later, we have evolved to 0.10 and are beginning to
become more and more stable. We have also decided that the
developments in trunk are so significant that they deserve a title
of Doctrine 2.0, the second generation of Doctrine.

Now, we need some help from our users. The 0.10 branch is down to
one failing test case(soon to be fixed). With over 100 unfixed
tickets, and 1 failing test case, this means we need some failing
test case writing done :) As I've said before, the best way to
ensure your issue is fixed, is to create a failing test case
replicating the issue. You can read about how to write test cases
for the 0.10 branch here.



.. author:: jwage 
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
