First symfony 1.1 workshop in Atlanta, USA
==========================================


.. raw:: html

   <p>
   
Three years after the launch of symfony as an Open-Source project,
Sensio Labs is very proud to announce its new offices in the USA.

.. raw:: html

   </p><p>
   
To celebrate, we organize our first symfony training in Atlanta
between October 29th and 31th. The training will be based on the
latest symfony 1.1 and will be held in Atlanta (at the "1230
Peachtree St N.E. Promenade II").

.. raw:: html

   </p><p>
   
This symfony workshop will be given by a symfony expert coming from
France and Jonathan Wage, the Doctrine lead developer, and a
seasoned symfony developer.??A symfony workshop is an interactive
training session during which you will learn how to develop
high-quality web applications fast and efficiently with symfony.
After three days of symfony immersion, guided by Sensio experts
sharing their knowledge and experience, you will know enough
techniques and methodology to become fluent in agile web
development with symfony. You can find more information and
subscribe online on our website.

.. raw:: html

   </p><p>
   
If you want more information, feel free to contact Nicolas Blin at
Nicolas.blin [at] sensio.com.Sensio Labs

.. raw:: html

   </p><p>
   
Sensio Labs helps its customers with their Internet strategy and
develops their applications around the best Open-Source frameworks.

.. raw:: html

   </p><p>
   
Sensio Labs created symfony a Web application framework in PHP.
Sensio Labs plays a major role in the Open-Source world. The
company has 10 years of experience in development of high value web
applications with more than 500 projects for key accounts in many
countries.

.. raw:: html

   </p>
   


.. author:: jwage <jonwage@gmail.com>
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
